## Generating and Writing Data into HDFS ##

### Generating Data: R vs. HDFS ###

Generating random numbers from essentially every distribution imaginable in R is typically a cinch with simple calls, like `Z <- rnorm(2^10)`. However, in the HaDoop File System (HDFS), a call of that nature will not have the generated data reach the HDFS and will instead have it sit in your local environment (whereever that may happen to be when you open R). Not to worry though, it is not too extensive to get randomly generated data into the HDFS.

### Generating and Writing Data into HDFS ###

The main purpose of the HDFS is to handle data sizes that are too large for your local environment. Thus, we are going to generate `m <- 2^10` random standard normal values as hinted at in the previous subsection. However, we are not only going to do this once, but `2^10 = 1,024` times for a total of `N <- 2^20` random standard normal values.

This should take up a little more than 8 Mega bytes (Mbs) of space, a fairly large local environment storage quantity merely for a collection of random numbers. Further, the code below will do this in the simplest way possible with the caveat of a few additional intelligent input variations from the default to improve the efficiency and plyability of the code to altering parameters.

```r
N <- 2^20
map <- expression({
  m <- 2^10
  for(i in seq_along(map.values)){
    Z <- rnorm(m)
    rhcollect(map.keys[[i]], Z)
  }
})
mr <- rhwatch(
  map      = map,
  input    = c(N/m, 10), 
  output   = paste("/tmp/rnorm/Nexp", log2(N), "mexp", log2(m), sep=""),
  mapred   = list(mapred.reduce.tasks = 0),
  readback = FALSE
  )
```

Note, the few, but subtle differences when transitioning from generating data in R vs. HDFS. We need to keep track of the map, key pair mechanism with commands such as `seq_along(map.values)`, `rhcollect(map.keys[[i]], Z)`, and `mapred = list(mapred.reduce.tasks=0)`.

A special note for `mapred.reduce.tasks=0`, the default choice is `1`, so that a reducer is available and operational should you only desire some summary statistic(s) from your data. However, if this task is not being utilized, it is more efficient to set this quantity to `0`, so you are not tying up resources to an operation not being utilized.

Finally, `readback = FALSE` asserts that the data is not immediately read into R as it is very easy to read any to all of your data into R later. However, usually there is no need to read the data into R and it is faster not to perform this action. Should you find a need to do this later, the subsections to follow go through the steps necessary to read your randomly generated data.

### Observing the Location of the HDFS Data ###

A simple call to list the available files (ls) within your HDFS directory through R utilizing the R Hadoop Integrated Programming Environment (RHIPE) library command `rhls()` will display where the random values are stored.

```r
head(rhls("/tmp/rnorm/Nexp20mexp10"))
```

```
   permission   owner      group size          modtime
1  -rwr---r-- jtroisi supergroup    0 2014-06-17 18:24
2  drwxrwxrwt jtroisi supergroup    0 2014-06-17 18:14
3  -rw-r--r-- jtroisi supergroup 8315 2014-06-17 18:14
4  -rw-r--r-- jtroisi supergroup 8315 2014-06-17 18:14
5  -rw-r--r-- jtroisi supergroup 8315 2014-06-17 18:14
6  -rw-r--r-- jtroisi supergroup 8315 2014-06-17 18:14
                                   file
1      /tmp/rnorm/Nexp20mexp10/_SUCCESS
2         /tmp/rnorm/Nexp20mexp10/_logs
3  /tmp/rnorm/Nexp20mexp10/part-m-00000
4  /tmp/rnorm/Nexp20mexp10/part-m-00001
5  /tmp/rnorm/Nexp20mexp10/part-m-00002
6  /tmp/rnorm/Nexp20mexp10/part-m-00003
```
Files are list as above.

### Reading the Data Stored in the HDFS into your Local Environment ###

To call any of these sets of random numbers into your local environment it is as simple as a call to the RHIPE command `rhread()`.

```r
Z0001of1024.list <- rhread("/tmp/rnorm/Nexp20mexp10/part-m-00000")
Z0001of1024.key <- Z0001of1024.list[[1]][[1]]
Z0001of1024.values <- Z0001of1024.list[[1]][[2]]
head(Z0001of1024.values)
```


```
[1]  2.49273  0.42530  0.08158 -0.33537 -0.97921 -0.81938
```


